Crowd: Resistance! Resistance! Resistance!
Jean-Luc Mélenchon: I knew you'd come.
I knew the wave that carries us is inexhaustible.
Generation after generation, it carried us from Bastille square to Republic square.
Listen! Listen to this clamor that bursts from our ranks!
This sound has no name, as the sound of wind in the leaves, as the sound of rain on the cobblestones.
This sound has no name but it is a signal: the signal of the people's strength when it emerges in its own history.
This roar that passes by upon our lines,
it is the roar of the bronze lion tat sits at the base of the monument
whose sculptor wished it to be a symbol of universal suffrage,
the suffrage that is about to speak and decide our fate.
Our voices are rising towards this woman, Marianne, the Republic,
this Republic that is unfinished as long as  the people is not the sovereign in its country in each and every aspect of its life.
Look at her.
She proudly wears the hat of emancipated slaves,
the hat of recovered freedom, the hat of  broken servitude.
It is our turn to wear this hat of unsubduedness that we take up.
Once more, we walked from Bastille square to Republic square.
Bastille square is the place where every momentum of freedom of the French people begins,
because it is the place where the symbol of monarchy and of the privileged caste was destroyed for the first time.
because it is the place where the last throne of the kings was detroyed,
because it is the place where the first feminist demonstration that demanded the right to vote for women occurred.
Five years ago, it is the place where we undertook what we carry on today, steadfastly and coherently,
full of self-confidence, patiently, until victory!
Upon us, the shades of the wretched faces of humiliated humanity also pass,
those who drowned in the Mediterranean, those who committed suicide at work, those who died abandonned on the street,
all those who suffer from this sickening world in which some accumulate wealth on the endless distress of others.
We are the revenge of the latters.
We are the smile they had, we are their intact dignity,
and the luminous hope of upcoming better days.
Rich and powerful of the Earth, here we are!
Once again, we are here, facing our history,
on the anniversary of the beginning of the glorious Paris Commune that invented the Social Republic.
Corwd: Resistance! Resistance! Resistance!
JLM: On this square, in front of the monument that was built for the centenary of the 1789 revolution
that made us a united and indivisible people,
not because of our ancestors, of our skin color or even of our language,
but because of the horizon that will always bring us together: Liberty, Equality, Fraternity!
All we want is this lie and this hypocrisy to cease,
that consist in inscribing this motto on every pediment in France and doing the exact opposite!
Here we are, we propose to establish the 6th Republic
on this square that saw the establishment of the 5th Republic that we want to abolish.
On this square, the people of Paris gathered after the terrorist attack and the crimes that aimed at terrorizing and dividing it, but in vain!
The strength of the people maintained its unity.
The strength of the people who gathered overcame everything.
On this square, people gathered after each demonstration against the El Khomri Labor law,
forming the "Nuit Debout" assemblies,
that day after day, dreaming, drew the outlines of a new world
in which such laws would cease to exist because our lives are more precious.
Once again, from Bastille square to Republic square, a common thread binds the boulevards together.
It is the thread of our struggles and of our commitments, of our flags that we always hold high.
Once again, we proclaim that without us, nothing makes sense in France!
Here we are, not for ourselves nor for this moment,
but out of virtue, for you, our people, and out of love, for you, our France!
People of France, and you, the world that so often looks at us, amazed,
here we are, we the citizens' revolution that always starts over,
as this people's passion for the universal rights of human beings, and for the citizens that they want to be.
These rights that this people was the first to proclaim,
that are illustrated in this Declaration that the bronze Marianne is holding before you.
So many people came today
Sometimes from so far away
Oh!
We needed to feel our strength.
It is our liberty,
It is the fire that burns inside us and will never extinguish,
It is the resort that France, and its hard-working people have in all circumstances.
From this rise en masse,
I take the part of sympathy
and of personal support
that it obviously includes.
But everyone must not lose sight of the fact
that we are not here for a figure, but for a platform.
That this is not only
an extraordinary event during an election campaign
as we never saw before,
This is a political manifestation,
a civic rebellion,
Against the presidential monarchy.
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
We came here from everywhere
to offer our people
to put an end to presidential monarchy
and to its intimate collusion
with the powers of money that subjugate and dominate it.
All the circumstances
invite us for the fervour we express.
If so much people gathered today, it's because they know.
It's because they know how serious is the situation of their country.
Between extreme right-wing that desires an ethnic nation
And the servants of the King Money
That endlessly want to destroy the State and public services.
The country, without us,
would threaten to fall out.
From this square,
We want to propose a positive way out
that our ballot paper represents.
A way out from the impasse
where dizzy leaders imprisoned us for at least ten years
that have no other vision of the world
than this rough dogma
according to which markets and finance
would be in the final analysis the final legitimate control
of human civilisation,
When we say
"It is fraternity,
"It is love,
"It is care for others
"which is the reason of being of society."
It is in the name of this dogma,
and of their personal inability to stand up to anything,
and to do anything else than always concede to those that seems stronger.
It is in the name of this
that they commited the worse treachery in democracy:
the betrayal of the vote of people,
the denial of its will,
the reversal of its decision.
In 2005 and in 2012,
against the vote of French people,
against their clearly expressed will,
Mr. Sarkozy and Mr. Hollande,
successive presidents of the fifth Republic,
gave,
without any legitimacy,
the consent of the country
for an organisation of the European Union
that takes popular sovereignty away
and submit the people to the sovereignty of money.
In this construction,
all powers were handed over
to a completely independent Central Bank
whose only purpose is to protect rent.
This construction forbids social harmonisation,
and fiscal harmonisation between countries.
That way, it organises an endless competition
between population and inside nations,
So that everywhere are incited
the blindest nationalisms
and the most absurd xenophobias.
The failure of this construction breaks in front of the present.
The profound ambition of people all around Europe to peace,
system of goodwill,
and to social progress,
system of care for others.
These feeling are completely perverted ever since.
As a consequence, everything must be disobeyed and discussed again.
Finally,
it is to the people, and only the people, once again,
when the time comes,
that will be asked by a referendary popular consultation
what it wants to do concerning what I will have negotiated in its name.
An for the future, whatever happens,
ALL the treaties that, one way or the other,
aim to hand down some part of popular sovereignty,
as it is sometimes necessary,
All these treaties will be automatically submitted to popular referendary approval.
Already,
the word of France having been commited without thought,
I say that if you elect me I will not sign the CETA.
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
Neither the free trade agreement with Canada,
and the Canadian people our friend,
nor any other free trade agreement with anyone
because it only leads to destroy everything.
And every time
that we would have to give up our social or environmental standards,
I swear an oath: the answer will be no.
If that much ravaging decisions
could be taken without us ever having our say,
It is because the constitution of the fifth republic provided the means to.
Let's take things into consideration, time having passed.
This constitution was tailored for an exceptional man
under exceptional circumstances
to face an exceptional situation.
This time is over.
But there is a text left
that must not be in the hands of certain people,
Because it offers to presidential monarchy
incredible means of absolute power.
One after the other, these powers were used.
Who here could forget how,
against the opinion of the mobilised people,
and against the opinion of the tied up Parliament,
the fire of the article 49-3 of the constitution was triggered
Six times!
Three times to impose the "Macron law",
three times to impose the "El Khomri law".
It is by this mean of incredible violence in a great democracy
that was inverted from top to bottom
all the social public order of our republic.
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
I deduce that if I am elected,
it will of course be immediately necessary to abrogate the "Macron law",
abrogate the "El Khomri law".
The new constitution
should make the fondamental basis of republican social public order untouchable.
It orders
that the law wanted by the people be placed at the top of the norms hierachy,
and that other agreements from fields or companies can only improve the law.
We must no longer accept
that it is possible to enact
a labour code per company under the threat of unemployment.
No more that we would imagine
a Highway Code per street
edited by road hogs.
The new constitution
must first be social.
It must allow
to respond to the devastating effects of relocation policies,
that one out of two,
given that all compete with everyone,
happens inside the European Union that was supposed to protect us.
And against pillaging,
vandalising,
of companies.
We have to supervise
the currently absolute liberty of shareholders
- whether they are people or financial funds -
that are just as many parasites and leeches installed on the productive corps.
That's why
workers must get constitutional rights
that make them citizens in the company
since the Republic, which defeated Monarchs in the city, left them here of course.
They must have the right of reproach,
and of disapproval,
against the decisions that put in jeopardy the longevity of the production tool.
They must have the pre-emptive right in cooperative
That is to say
the right to become fully and legitimately the owners of the work tools
when those that own them intend to sell them.
I began my demonstration of the great change that it is necessary to undertake in our democracy by these social questions.
Yes, I wanted to immediately sweep away the idea
that making a constitution would be, in the end, taking care of abstract things
that would only affect the organisation of public authorities.
No, writing a constitution
is writing the kind of society we want to live in,
By stating what are the rights that we admit to one another,
and to each other with the nature.
Our project is one of a kindly society, pleasant for its members.
A peaceful and democratic society,
concerned with the dignity of each person,
and with how to provide it.
A society that wants to live in harmony with its members,
that does not accept misery and poverty in the middle of opulence.
A society
that finally finds the way to its harmony
with the natural ecosystem, our common homeland to us all, human beings.
By calling in an assembly
to write this constitution
we use a method that, de facto,
puts an end to the reign of providential men and women,
of all kinds of experts committees
that endlessly substitute for community intelligence
that all the people forms.
It cannot be in question,
just as it was done in 1958,
that a small group of friends write a text that suits the leaders
and then put it to the vote of people as a personal plebiscite.
Under these circumstances,
an Assembly must be constituent.
It has to take the time to do its work
while listening to its members
and while listening a lot to the country itself, in particular.
There is an urgency.
The current presidential monarchy must be urgently abolished.
Listen to me:
I sound the alarm.
Nowadays, do we correctly measure the dangers that this text enables,
if its use was in the hands of some sorcerer's apprentice?
The article 16 of the current constitution
gives special abolute powers to the President of the Republic
without control
during 30 days.
The article 35
gives the possiblity to the government
to send troops abroad
without the vote of the Parliament, during four months.
The article 36
enables the council of ministers
to decree the state of siege for 12 days
and to transfer the power to the militaries.
We boo the transfer, not the millitaries.
The militaries,
they serve and obey,
like it is their duty,
for the homeland.
The article 13
gives the president
the right to name the holders of the highest civil and military functions.
I stop there a list I could extend.
Many of these measures have already been applied.
But I alert:
They could be used once again
under different circumstances
and for different objectives.
Women and men of France,
do not entrust,
be it temporary,
such powers
to people determined to use them as they already herald,
while they bow to ethnicity or to money.
In the current atmosphere in Europe,
and in the current atmosphere of France,
is it reasonable
that such a personal power
be this way placed out of reach?
People gathered here
propose to France
to put an end to it.
On the contrary, I propose to keep under all circumstances
a capacity
of direct intervention
from the people,
so that...
[Sheets flying in the wind] Thank you. Thank you.
I propose to keep under all circumstances a capacity of direct intervention from the people,
So that at any moment,
and as long as certain conditions - still to be fixed - are fulfilled,
such as the number of petitioners,
a referendum can be organised
that enables the end of the mandate
of any elected representative
from the mayor, departmental councillor,
to, of course, the President of the Republic as well.
For us,
that are the witnesses
and the voice
of the power of the people
here is our maxim:
whatever the problem is,
the solution is the people.
We rightly observe
that since 1958,
this people that was then rural,
became massively urban.
We observe
that it mixed up over and over again
by successive waves.
And we are from those
that are delighted with the part of joy
that all of this brings in our collective life.
But after so much cupidity,
so much absurd elation,
of the power of richness
that only concentrates
at the cost of others' poverty...
Anyway!
Our people has been divided,
our people has been scattered,
our people has been split by those precarious status,
back and forth between massive unemployment
and temporary activity.
And all of this made an impact
All of this made many times lose sight
of what was yet common to us.
Writing
a constitution
all together,
it is first decreeing that we,
whoever we are, are equal in rights.
And that it is together,
that we mutually admit our rights.
In this way,
by writing the constitution,
it is the people that refounds itself
and mixes up itself in a whole
to become the one and indivisible republic again.
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
So that it may be so,
and so that we decide
each one
from her perspective, with her history, and her own trajectory;
So that every one of us can freely contribute
to the collecitve reflection,
above all,
the absolute freedom of conscience of the human beings, that we are, must be protected
Of course,
it is the matter of secularity.
State and churches must be absolutely separated.
We only need,
in order to do this...
In order to do this, we only need to implement the law.
Without excessive impatience,
without mixing up what comes from the law,
and what comes from personal convitctions.
But with the calm confidence
of those who know
that in any case,
every one of us
would be on the front line
if the freedom of any one of us was blamed,
whatever the content.
In the end,
the law must be implemented.
And in order to do this,
first and before numerous discussions,
it must be implemented everywhere,
to everyone,
and in the same conditions.
In particular,
all territories of the republic
have to receive
the beneficial secularity of the State.
That's why all the concordatory systems,
those of Alsace-Moselle, Guyane, and all other concerned territories
will all be abrogated.
Enter even further
in the duties that freedom sets for you.
Freedom of conscience has an obvious twin,
a fundamental human liberty:
the one to entirely and absolutely manage  youself.
It is thus time...
It is thus time to write in the constitution
the right to abortion, because the body of each woman...
...because the body of each woman
absolutely and exclusively belongs to herself.
This liberty has to be written in the constitution
so that it is never again submitted to electoral jolts,
like those we observed in numerous countries,
in Poland or in USA,
with the results we know.
Our country is not protected from such infamies.
It is an inalienable right,
and the constitution has to solemnly declare it.
In the same state of mind,
having first in mind and in heart the idea of what human diginity is,
to which every one of us deeply aspire ;
with this in mind,
I personally support
- the Constituent will state it -
that we write in the fundamental law
the right to assisted suicide.
When comes the time
to confront what we cannot do anything against
other than enforcing your freedom to switch off the light,
then you need the helping hand to assist you.
Ultimate freedom, that gives all its meaning to a truly humane life.
Those individual rights are new, of course,
just like the circumstances and the means that enabled their appearance.
Of course, we could not defend the freedom and the neutrality of the Internet before it existed.
But because it exists, it is then a basic freedom that must be warranted.
The constituent work has to meet the challenges of its time,
and firstly to the one that is laid down to the whole human comminity
and that threatens the longevity of the civilisation itself.
For the moment,
the greatest challenge of all,
and the greatest responsibility before anything else for a great nation technically advanced like ours,
it is that climate change has begun
and that we need to know if we respond every man for itself,
or all together.
Of course,
we don't need to change the constitution to organise environmental planning,
move on to 100% renewable energy,
quit nuclear energy,
and break up with the abominable chemical agriculture,
that is now poisoning the upcoming generations and creates malformations.
Although we don't need it for all of this because the law will provide for it,
we have the duty to set ourself an imperative general rule
that makes us change our ways of producing,
and of trading,
and of consuming.
This rule is "the Green Rule"
It is better
and more useful than their so-called "golden rule",
the only virtue they honour.
We recover from lack of money,
we would not recover from the destruction of our world.
The Green Rule
is not taking more from nature than what it can recover.
This technical and scientific challenge
is the key to the new humanism of which we carry the flag.
We have to decide once and for all to move in this direction
as far as possible in our understanding of what matters nowadays like we never realised before in times past.
We have to decide
that there are inalienable common goods,
that air and water are these common goods.
As well as knowledge,
art, and culture,
that improve
what is humane inside us.
But these common goods,
air, water,
must be the public property of the nation.
It is the nation's duty to protect them
and to make those who destroy them pay for their repair.
Let's go!
Let's move even more forward!
In the end,
we have to build a new state of mind.
We have to admit for good
that the biosphere is a whole
that must be respected as it is.
We thus have to admit and write in our constitution
that we prohibit the patenting of life.
And most likely
we will have to declare as well
as a rule for ever
as a proof of our collective improvement
the rule that animals are not things,
and that the proof
of our conscious humanity
is certified when we decide to enforce this principle.
I cannot leave this square
and finish what I have to say
without asking you to look at her.
The bronze Marianne here
holds in her fingertips
an olive branch.
Think about it.
Think about it strongly!
It is the symbol of peace.
All of you, here,
and you that are listening to us at that moment,
hear what is our common duty.
Peace is a precious good that must be cherished and protected.
In Europe, and in the world, wars spread,
weapons accumulate,
tensions of domination excite
on all seas,
on all continents.
Bellicose leaders are facing each other,
in Europe as well...
[Man screaming] Great. I'd like to talk.
Europe...
Listen to me...
I said, bellicose leaders are facing each other, and in Europe as well.
We, France,
have a useful and key role to play
to build and organise peace from now on threatened.
We must not accept
that, according to the terrible words of the current president of the republic,
Europe re-enters the race with defence,
because Europe of defence
is Europe of war.
Europe of defence?
But against who?
But with who?
What for?
We know too well
the chain of events that one word after the other
drags up to a point
where nobody controls anything anymore.
Our history is completely full of those,
and our people have been martyred enough
so that we became vigilant.
France has to be an indepedent power,
politically and militarily.
It has to refuse to be dragged by automatic alliances systems
into conflicts that could emerge here and there
and that in the end it would not have anything else to know but to try to prevent them.
We want peace
and thus we will leave NATO if this resonsibility is ours.
France, on our initiative...
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
France, on our initiative,
will extend the hand of friendship to every people
that refuse to follow behind either of the empires that nowadays dominate the world.
France will build an unaligned alliance,
pacific, working for peace in all circumstances.
But if we take such a way,
then of course, we will have to start by removing from the contitution
this dangerous and absurd measure
that allows a single man to decide of a war.
It is necessary so that France leaves this aggressive escalation into which it has been dragged for ten years,
and into which its weapons have been committed
in a very dangerous and hazardous way
without ever knowing when what has been started could end well,
for the reason that we do not have any kind of idea when starting.
Our march
demonstrates that we are able to lead the country.
We are able to make our homeland a point of reference
for the great challenges that the universal humanity has to take up.
For my part,
I am prepared for it.
Our march today,
our will to build a new France
by building its sixth republic,
is in keeping with this fundamental thought,
expressed by the great Jaurès:
"political democracy
"comes down to one central idea
"or even a single idea:
"the political sovereignty of the people."
In the past,
France often needed to go through great ordeals
to then be able to pull itself together.
It is often with tumult and storm
that everything broke and that everything was then to rebuild.
We now offer a great and profound radical change,
peacefully, pacifically, democratically acquired,
by the collective debate of an assembly,
composed of elected members or randomly selected among French people.
O you my people,
you have to change everything if you don't want everything to change against you.
You have to do this civic revolution,
if you don't want to endure an ethnic coup d'état,
or a financial coup d'etat,
or both together.
It is thus to the people, to you, to proceed to the radical separation of the state, of democracy, of our humane duties on one hand,
from money on the other hand.
Folks!
Folks, listen!
We now have to show what the sovereign people is worth.
Ballot papers have to make the clean sweep that makes them all without exception clear off.
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
Crowd: Clear off! Clear off!
After "Resistance!", a new watchword is born.
It is "Clear off!"
Crowd: Clear off! Clear off!
Clear off, so that the privileges of finance be abolished,
those of the insolent caste that holds all powers and share them out,
those of the presidential monarchy and of all the golden suites of the capital.
Think big, French people, think big for your homeland.
You will never do it as well as by reading the poets that sang France,
and that help you, help us, in particular.
I will finish my words, me too, with Victor Hugo.
I give you this text
as a personal message,
for ever,
and as a signal of the gratitude I feel at that moment,
like so many other before,
for the honour you did me
by naming me as your spokesperson.
Through me,
let every little French woman,
every little French man,
especially if he comes from far,
know that there is no greater heart than that of this country,
that it is not true that he dedicated itself to hate,
that it is always open to offer a helping hand,
for help, mutual protection, joy,  happiness to be together.
Go on, speak, Victor Hugo!
"Throughout the earth to-day the name of France is revolution ;
"and henceforth this word 'revolution' will be the name of civilisation,
"until it can be replaced by the word 'harmony'."
'Harmony', like this Phi we chose to symbolise who we are at that time in history.
[From the crowd] - Revolution!
"Ay!", says Victor Hugo,
"every one of us, great and small, powerful and despised, illustrious and obscure,
"in all our works, good or bad,
"whatever they may be, poems, dramas, romances, history, philosophy,
"at the tribune of assemblies as before the crowds of the theatre
"or in solitary meditation ;
"Ay! everywhere and always ;
"Ay! to combat violence and imposture ;
"Ay! to restore those who are stoned and run down ;
"Ay! to draw logical conclusions and to march straight onward ;
"Ay! to console, to succour, to relieve, to encourage, to teach ;
"Ay! to dress wounds, in hope of curing them !
"Ay! to transform charity into fraternity, alms into helpfulness, sloth into industry, idleness into usefulness,
"[...] to convert iniquity to justice,
"[...] the populace into the people, the rabble into the nation, nations into humanity, war into love, prejudice into free inquiry, frontiers into welded joints, barriers into thoroughfares, ruts into rails, vestry-rooms into temples, the instinct of evil into the desire of good, life into right, kings into men ;
"Ay! to deprive religions of hell, and societies of the prison-den ;
"Ay! to be brothers to the wretched, the serf, the fellah, the poor labourer, the disinherited, the victim, the betrayed, the conquered, the sold, the shackled, the sacrificed, [...], the convict, the ignorant, the savage, the slave, the negro, the condemned, the damned ;
"Ay! for all these things we're thy sons, O Revolution !"
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
[Marseillaise: first verse]
[Marseillaise: chorus]
Crowd: Resistance! Resistance!
[Marseillaise: sixth verse]
[Marseillaise: chorus]
[From the crowd] - Revolution!
[From the crowd] - The Internationale!
Crowd: Mélenchon, president! Mélenchon, president!
It has sometimes been said
that on the grounds that I appear before all,
I would have forgotten where I come from and who I am,
and what is my motherland in the old days.
Then in this anniversary day of the Paris Commune,
it is now to us, for those who know it,
to strike up in memory of our family, who died for freedom, the Internationale.
[The Internationale]
Let every one of us do what she has to do.
As for me, I will take with all my heart and all my strength the part of work that is mine,
and I very much hope that every one of you does the same.
Long live the Republic, long live France!
Crowd: Mélenchon, president! Mélenchon, president!